one of the things that is
counter-intuitive and one of the
misconceptions that I see crop up out
there in Academia intellectual circles
people think that there's a final theory
that what we're trying to achieve is a
bucket full of theories that will be the
truth at the end of some period of
Discovery will be able to carry around
the bucket and say well here are all the
truths we've got no more work to do
we're going to sit down and do nothing
apparently except let the AI take care
of all the menial jobs we're going to be
laying back on sun chairs and drinking
cocktails or something like that but you
as far as I can tell are the only person
today explaining that this whole vision
of the way in which knowledge is
constructed and what our purpose is in
science and everywhere else is
completely misconceived it's not just
that it's a little bit wrong it's
infinitely wrong because there won't
come a time when we're going to be
laying on the sun chairs drinking
cocktails intellectually speaking can
you say a little bit more about that
because it did come from was talking
about problems absolutely Popper's
philosophy is actually very Broad in a
sense because it's so deep popper only
had one idea and that is that it all
begins with problems and there's no
Royal Road to solving them and if you
look at it the right way that tells you
to go to fallibalism and
anti-authoritarianism and conjecture and
criticism and so on then he applied that
to lots of different things and he wrote
dozens of books people bought them and
every philosopher has heard of him
but there I have to draw the line that's
as much success as he had nobody
actually got it even many of his
supporters because people tended to get
part of it although when someone is very
creative and successful in a particular
area they tend to be a properian in that
area and they usually insist that it's a
special property of that area they have
to be if you're going to make progress
the only possible way of doing it is
finding the problem purported Solutions
and then criticizing those Solutions so
you're necessarily up appearing if
you're making progress even if you don't
know it if I were to give an example of
exactly what you're talking about I
interviewed Matt Ridley who was a hero
of mine growing up because I read all of
his popular science books I remember his
book genome and his book the rational
Optimist and his most recent one which
is about Innovation it's all about trial
and error or variation of selection or
as you say in science conjecture and
criticism these are all just the same
method these are creative guesses and
once you fully absorb this it changes
your view of the world you just see that
everything is creatively making guesses
we're not copying we're not getting it
from the environment it's not something
that's evident to us clearly in nature
and then as we absorb it more and more
as bayesians are inductivists that we
somehow come up with the truth no it's
rather everything is a theory-laden
guess it's funny because I'm teaching
this to my six-year-old because I want
him to have the solid foundation and he
now understands intuitively that yeah
everything is a guess so every time we
get to something and he asks why I said
let's start making some guesses so once
you absorb this view of the world it is
evident everywhere for example in my
domain in Technology Innovation people
think yes I'm being creative I'm
guessing the artists think they're being
creative and they're guessing by the way
you just mentioned a solid foundation of
epistemology for your six-year-old even
in popular and epistemology its role is
not to be solid foundation it also
requires Improvement and is always
imperfectly stated I think that Papa
didn't concentrate enough on the concept
of explanation the purpose of science is
explanation so one of the footnotes I've
added to popular epistemology is that
it's not just that good explanations are
good heuristically and they help us to
discover things
it's rather that discovering them is
what the whole thing is about when you
talk about for example testability the
only reason why testability is important
is that in a particular field namely
physics is the way one can test
explanations I'd like to draw a
distinction between experiments
demonstrations and measurements when you
do this experiment with the acid and
base since there's no rival Theory what
you're doing is a demonstration if
you're showing that to a class of school
children you can say you'd never believe
what happens when I pour this into that
you'll never guess in a million years
and then you pour it in and it changes
color and they say and we've seen that
kind of thing before but then it changes
color back and then forward and back and
then you say how can that happen that
contradicts everything you've been told
in chemistry so far how can we find out
some people say this was how it worked
then someone else came along and said
that was how it worked how can we
distinguish between those and that is an
experiment it's testing two different
explanations against each other where
you can't tell without the experiment
which is the good explanation
and then there's a measurement like the
difference between what Newton did and
what Cavendish did Newton developed the
theory of gravitation but he never
measured Newton's constant I think don't
quote me on this Newton could measure GM
where m is the mass of the Earth he
couldn't measure G and M separately and
therefore when they guessed the mass of
the Sun and so on it was always as a
multiple of the mass of the Earth then
Cavendish by actually getting a Hands-On
experiment where you had gravitational
force between two things whose Mass you
could measure directly comparatively
weighing them against a standard
kilogram or whatever they had in those
days then you can measure the constant
now that is not an experiment it's
called the Cavendish experiment but in
this terminology I'm trying to set up
that's not an experiment because there's
only one explanation involved before
during and after after Cavendish
experiments he never doubted Newton's
theory of gravity what he was trying to
do was to measure Newton's constant
somebody could have come along and said
well maybe Newton's constant is
different on different parts of the
Earth but nobody did say that if they
had then cavendish's measurement would
have turned into an experiment but there
was no good explanation along those
lines because Newton's theory was
incredibly successful in part because it
was so Universal so because of the
problem situation at the time what was
missing was a measurement many
experiments now that are called
experiments are really measurements and
many of them are really demonstrations
let me make sure I understand you're
saying experiment chooses between rival
explanations or rival theories a
demonstration just shows if I do this I
get that this is how the world seems to
work this is observable and the
measurement can help refine a Theory and
make it more precise by figuring out
things about it that we didn't know and
those are three distinct things and we
use the term experiment Loosely but it's
really this key thing that is done once
in a while to choose between two
competing explanations this is a very
rare occurrence it's very rare to have
two rival good explanations going back
to good explanations for a moment
there's a few other techniques that I
see you use a lot in the two books when
referring to good and bad explanations
one is that good explanations make these
risky predictions Einstein had the
prediction of the light bending around
the Sun or Starlight bending around the
Sun there's these risky and narrow
predictions that before you would not
have anticipated another one you've
talked about the simplest answer or
Solomon off induction where solipsism is
a bad explanation because you still have
complex and autonomous entities but now
you've added this extra entity in your
mind I don't mention solomonov induction
but I do mention in the book that the
simplest explanation that's not the
right way to look at it because you can
only detect or measure or Define
Simplicity once you have let's say a
Theory of physics
then you can say the Simplicity is the
smallest number of bits in which a given
program could be encoded but if bits
behaved differently then things would
become simple that were previously
complex and that's exactly what happened
with Quantum computation so there is no
scale of complexity or Simplicity that
is prior to physics it's always given
the Theory of physics you can in
principle Define complexity or
Simplicity but it doesn't make sense to
ask how complex say a Theory of physics
is because that's the wrong way round
Simplicity is not prior to science it's
posterior this is also a theme running
through your work computation has to be
done in the real world and has to obey
the laws of quantum physics you talk
about mathematics has to be bound to the
laws of physics so even the reductionist
argument that no all the good theories
are basic just depends on what the laws
of physics are and what the context
you're approaching it it is exactly and
what you've just said refutes Solomon
off induction as well because that is
based on a particular measure namely the
length of touring computer programs but
he was unaware that he was assuming a
complex structured Theory of physics and
then saying that we should choose the
Theory of physics that is simplest in
those terms I would expect that sometime
after quantum theory there'll be yet
another dispensation which will give us
a different conception of complexity and
simplicity but already as a matter of
logic it doesn't make sense to consider
Simplicity and complexity as being a
priori fundamental compared with physics
one thing you bring up a lot I would
almost call it a Deutsche refutation
because I see you use this more often
than almost any other author is the
theory refutes itself for example you
talk about the precautionary principle
since civilization has never followed
the precautionary principle if we start
following it now we're no longer being
precautionary so it refutes itself
that's one example but you use many of
these so there's these self-refutations
buried in a lot of these theories
another way of putting that though
rather than thinking of it as a method
of refutation is to think this is just
what it means to take theories seriously
rather than just as forms of words that
one learns to say like physics
professors when asked something
important about Quantum Theory they have
learned to say ah well it's a particle
in a wave at the same time and if the
student says what does that mean and the
professor May well say you get used to
it you will understand that eventually
but what they often say regrettably is
that's the wrong question to ask that's
not a meaningful question and you're not
allowed to ask that question but the
question isn't based in a
misunderstanding of quantum theory it's
the other way around it's taking quantum
theory seriously and saying I want to
understand quantum theory and saying
that it's both a particle and wave at
the same time is not an answer to that
question it's a way of shutting up the
questioner I used to get it's born as a
particle lives as a wave and dies as a
particle because the experiments that
capture the entity that's moving will
only ever capture the particle but then
the interference is explained by it
being a wave so that was a tricky way of
trying to get around the wave particle
duality by saying well not technically
at the same time but there was no
explanation for how it transitioned
between being particle to wave or how it
knew it should move between being a
particle and a wave yes and of course it
can move back as well if we have a more
complex interference experiment it's a
particle then a wave then a particle if
you look at some of Edmund's experiments
it's very hard to get your head around
if you don't have the average
interpretation because it totally
depends on taking seriously this Quantum
entity that cannot be described as a
particle or a wave if what was saying of
our good explanations is that they
really are accounts of reality in what
sense are we getting closer to reality
with the good explanations my classic
go-to example of Newton explaining
gravity as this force that acts
instantly on the bodies and then it is
superseded by Einstein general
relativity where there is no such Force
whatsoever so saying that this thing
that was part of a good explanation no
longer exists at all dad you answered
that question one is in the book and one
isn't in the book I say there are many
Concepts laws explanations that are
shared between Newton's Theory and
Einstein's theory of gravity for example
both theories adopt the heliocentric
cosmology and they say that the motion
of the earth and the other planets in
gravity is caused by the sun it's
because the sun is there that an
influence is felt now the influence is
not a force it's a curvature of
space-time but that curvature of
space-time is caused by the mass of the
Sun but there's another other sense in
which say Newton's Theory and Einstein's
theory are more closely related than you
might think Newton's Theory contains the
problems to which Einstein's theory is
solution Newton said that gravity
travels instantaneously that was a
problem which people recognized before
Einstein they wanted to explain what
does it even mean for something to
travel instantly
and then there was the fact that if the
universe lasts forever as Newton thought
then how come in the long run it doesn't
all collapse
and I don't know if Newton was aware of
what's called Alba's Paradox why is the
sky black but according to Newton's
theory if the universe is either
infinite or very big then the sky should
be white again that is a problem
Newton's Theory can't really answer you
have to make some very ad hoc
assumptions to fit that into Newton's
Theory as a cosmology and Einstein's
theory just solves that problem which
was in Newton's Theory and Newton's
Theory solves the problem in Kepler's
Theory which was so severe that Galileo
rejected it Galileo did not want to
believe Kepler's Theory because it
didn't explain why the orbits were
ellipses if they had been circles there
was a explanation that would have fitted
into the philosophy of the time the
circle is the perfect shape if it wasn't
a circle you'd have to explain why isn't
it a circle kebbler was like well just
look it's an ellipse and that wasn't
good enough for Galileo you so he had to
torture the theory to make it predict
circles but then Newton came along and
said it's the inverse Square law and
that can make circles but it can make
ellipses and that is a deeper level of
explanation even than saying circles are
perfect shapes so they're related by
their common assumptions and they're
related by the problems that they have
or solve
what you say there though it raises the
tension between Karl Popper and Thomas
Kern who to some extent overeg this idea
that we have these Grand Revolutions in
the history of science that completely
overturn the previous Paradigm and
anyone working in that existing Paradigm
is literally incapable of conceiving at
how this new paradigm Works has a
lot more support out there in the
intellectual Community than popper
certainly amongst the humanities even
amongst the Sciences to some extent and
of course has been taken to the
extreme ever since by anything calling
itself science like gender science or
something that appends the word science
too some particular subject Kern did say
correct things but as you just said it's
not the case that we completely do away
with the previous Paradigm and the
people who create the new paradigm tend
to have understood the previous Paradigm
and solving problems from that previous
Paradigm this picture of the young
iconoclasts being rejected by the old
stick in the muds and then the young
iconoclasts draws together a few friends
and when the old stick in the muds die
then the young iconoclasts become the
old stick in the muds the thing is it's
pure fiction I don't know of any actual
situation where that happened what does
happen is that people often irrationally
stick to their own ideas whether they
are new ideas or old ideas people can be
stubborn sometimes stubborn people who
support a theory for no reason except
that they feel it's right turn out to be
right but there's no algorithm for
determining who is Right according to
who is more stubborn sometimes the
person who's more stubborn is actually
right like Lister and zemelweiss they
stuck to their guns they were ejected
but even then it was not a generational
thing there was a much more complex
process at work they didn't just reject
a theory they rejected having to change
their working practices that reduced
their perceived dignity but the
perceived Dignity of doctors is
functional especially in the days when
not much was known about medicine if you
told a person that they had to have
their tonsils taken out which was
extremely unpleasant difficult painful
process you needed a bit of authority
irrational as it is but the world was
much more irrational in those days and
when science got better people became
more open to argument but the
generational story as I say in fabric of
reality provides no extra explanation
for them changing from one Theory to
another it's as if they just invent a
new fashion like when Christian Dior
says put up your hemline then every
woman in the world puts up their hemline
it used to happen Apparently that is not
the description of what happens in
science there's a reason why people
adopt a theory even if it's false
there's a reason why they adopt it if
it's not satisfactory to them they're
not adopting it and sometimes they're
irrational that's just how it is but
it's not a picture of science
I think this is quite obvious if you
look at technology we might have gone
from analog attempts at Computing to
vacuum tubes to transistors and vacuum
tubes or transistors is less of a jump
than analog Computing to vacuum tubes
clearly there's progress along the way
now we don't use vacuum tube Computing
anymore it's been obsoleted but doesn't
mean it was wrong it was a necessary
stepping stone it was closer to the
truth and there was a lot to be learned
from there when you encounter it in real
life then it becomes a lot more tangible
and it's harder to refute I find that
the more feedback that you take from
other people the more likely you're to
go astray whereas the more feedback you
take from reality and nature the closer
you are to the truth and in science
unfortunately a lot of it gets mixed up
in philosophy and Academia where they're
not actually interacting as much with
the real world it shouldn't happen in
physics but there is this social
feedback loop where you're talking to
other people you're not always building
things the Rockets don't have to fly so
to speak but the growth of knowledge is
possible in philosophy too even in
Morality and epistemology even when you
don't have physical reality
it's this thing I called a few minutes
ago taking the theory seriously that
refutation of solipsism is nothing more
than taking solipsism seriously rather
than saying it might all just be my
dream you go on from there okay if this
is my dream what can we say about my
dream so I'm dreaming the bus I'm
Dreaming all the people in it now
there's a person who is wearing a yellow
suit did I make that up I've never
thought of it before now I'm seeing it
so if I'm a solipsist I have to have an
explanation for how the things in my
dream can have come about and that's
really why solipsism destroys itself and
in philosophy in physics too most ideas
destroy themselves as you said a little
while ago it's rare to have a case where
you can actually decide between two
explanations by experiment when it comes
to progress and understanding is there
going to be a theory that we're not
going to be able to understand I think
it's the prevailing View at the moment
that there's got to be something out
there that is beyond our comprehension
how do we know that there isn't a limit
how do we know that there'll be no new
mathematical knowledge to discover we
can't know we could be wiped out by an
incoming planet from another galaxy that
is hurtling through our galaxy at half
the speed of light and we'll just be all
killed instantly there's no known theory
that says that isn't going to happen and
similarly the same could be true in the
universe of ideas there could be a brick
wall somewhere where we won't go any
further than that but in both cases
invoking that as an argument about what
we can or should do is logically
equivalent to believing in the
Supernatural because why did I just say
a planet moving at half the speed of
light why didn't I say an asteroid
moving at 99 percent of Suite of light
why didn't I say an illness that
operates on principles that we don't
know and will wipe us out in a few days
there's an Infinity of things I could
have said and all of them make a
sophisticated prediction without having
an explanation for it it's exactly the
same when people say that the world is
going to end on such and such a Tuesday
I would want to ask them why Tuesday why
not Wednesday and they will say because
Tuesday comes out of my interpretation
of the Bible and I would say why your
interpretation of the Bible and not this
other guy who says it's Wednesday and
pretty much immediately they don't have
an answer to that because they do not
have an explanation for their prediction
and it's the same with the idea that the
explanatory universality is going to run
out for one reason or another whether
it's physical wipe out or AGI apocalypse
or we're all simulations in a computer
and so on but there is this impulse in
people to suggest things like solipsism
the simulation hypothesis whatever it
happens to be as the final Theory the
interesting thing about your work is
that you work at the foundations you go
as deep as you possibly can but at the
same time you're against foundationalism
how do you square this circle for people
how do you say well I'm looking at the
foundations but on the other hand I'm
against foundations
it's rather like the relationship
between physics and Structural
Engineering foundations are theories
that explain why the higher level
theories are as they are but you can't
use Newton's Theory to build a bridge to
build a bridge you need theories of
bridge building Christopher wrens one of
the reasons why he was a successful
architect is that he began to use
Newton's Theory seriously to design
buildings so when deciding what the
distance between pillars ought to be
rather than have a master Builder's eye
for what that should look like and what
will or won't collapse he could actually
work it out using Newtonian mechanics
that means that Newtonian mechanics was
playing a sort of role of understanding
what makes buildings stand up in the
first place and also criticizing
particular designs as being not as good
as other designs then you could use
measurement and demonstration and so on
to fill in the gaps but if you're just
given Newton's Theory you wouldn't think
of a suspension bridge
nowhere in Newton's principia is there a
picture of a suspension bridge that was
invented later so engineering is a
separate subject and you don't study
Newton's Laws primarily to help you
build better Bridges but what Newton's
Theory did was unify our understanding
it gave us a new level of understanding
it influenced other Sciences people
tried to make Newton theories in other
fields of knowledge some of which worked
and some of which didn't work now it's
only this Newton English Christopher
Wren English Alan Turing English what's
special about England We Shouldn't Judge
one culture as being Superior to another
however it seems as though we've got the
beginnings of a special kind of
Enlightenment there in Britain leading
to an industrial revolution what's going
on why is there so much coming out of
England and perhaps the anglo-sphere
more broadly there was the Enlightenment
which largely took place in England
although there were individual people
who participated in it in France and
Germany as well but in England it became
the mainstream much faster it was a
rebellion against Authority but it was a
non-utopian rebellion so instead of
saying let's get rid of the authority
and replace it by the thing that's
really true the thing that was really
reliable the thing that we won't ever
have to overturn again it was a case of
look there's this problem some people
have a privilege but God tells us that
all people are equal what can we do to
fix this problem
you also had quite rapid social change
economic change but it all took the form
of extending to more and more classes of
people privileges that had previously
been only in the ruling class you had
Parliament which was only open to a
certain group of people then it was
opened up to more people and so on there
was a phrase the englishman's home is
his castle now I'm not a historian but
presumably an Aristocrats home was his
castle his castle was his home and his
home was his castle and nobody was
legitimately allowed to interfere with
him in his own domain
so when you then made reforms that said
that an englishman's home is his castle
that was a modification of existing
knowledge of how to structure Society
now you had people who owned houses who
were still a small minority but they
weren't the aristocracy there was a
ready-made set of privileges that could
be extended until eventually one after
another they were extended to everyone
whereas in France or Germany it was
different it was reforms were all about
abolishing things abolishing the Tyrant
to this day there are traditions of
utopianism the idea is to set up
institutions that will last forever and
they are to be set up by fundamental
theories like human rights and you write
them down once and for all then make it
difficult to change them and set up
institutions that are going to protect
those rights forever but Britain has
stuck to its plan over centuries and it
has produced rapid change without any
sudden revolutions or without any
extremism
in the 1930s
totalitarian theories were very
widespread all over Europe and
totalitarian parties either took over or
were a major threat to democratic
parties whereas in Britain there was a
fascist movement but it never got a
single MP and it went away of its own
accord soon afterwards that's because it
was taken for granted in British
political culture the political system
is here to solve problems you petitioned
the government for a redress of
grievances not to line each other up
against the wall and shoot them the
theory was that there is such a thing as
a grievance there is such a thing as
redressing it that it's not easy to do
that the way to do it is to have the
Rival theories confront each other you
must be allowed to say what you think
the problem is and other people say what
they think the problem is and so on
nowhere is it a assumed that someone has
the final answer this is why the current
rage against misinformation is so
troubling and people even invoke popper
for it as a political cartoon that goes
around invoking popper as saying we
don't tolerate the intolerance so we
have to shut them up because they're
spreading misinformation when nothing
could be more the opposite of popper
which is you have to have debate have
rival opposing theories have a system
for removing bad rulers and reversing
bad decisions and in that sense a clear
first pass the post system with two
parties makes sense because you can hold
one accountable against the other and
every eventual successful truth is
defined as misinformation by the other
side because it contradicts what is
already believed to be true so
eliminating misinformation a priority is
impossible because knowledge a priori is
impossible it has to be creatively
conjectured and discovered there is this
beautiful idea in a fabric of reality
and when I try to explain it to friends
in my own halting way it blows their
minds it combines all four strands of
the fabric of reality talk about
epistemology computation quantum physics
Evolution and if I can summarize the
Insight it goes something like this
knowledge is a thing that causes itself
to be replicated in the environment if I
figure out how to create fire then other
people in the environment will copy that
because it's useful if there's a gene
that is well adapted to the environment
then the sequence in the gene that leads
to higher survivability gets copied
whereas if there's random or junk DNA
that's not going to get copied and if
you look at how the Multiverse
differentiate the randomness the
non-useful part the information that is
not knowledge will be different in the
multiverses whereas the knowledge that
is useful the genes that are leaving to
higher adaptation the ideas that are
leading to higher survivability the
inventions that we're creating that are
actually working the philosophies that
we have that are causing us as humans to
thrive and replicate those will become
common across the Multiverse so it will
almost be like there is a crystal of
knowledge and I don't think this is
doable if you're somehow able to peek at
the Multiverse as a single object then
truth would be emergent or we would be
closer to the truth by seeing what is
common across the Multiverse and what is
different across the Multiverse would
not be true this insight as far as I
know is unique and massively interesting
but is there anything practical out of
it someday there's fundamental reason
why even if we could look into the
Multiverse it wouldn't be that much help
because there is no limit to the size of
error we can make therefore when you
look around in a Multiverse and see all
these crystals yes on the whole there
are great big fat ones and then you can
guess that this one is heading towards
the truth you can't tell where because
you don't know where this Crystal is
going to go and then there'll be this
other great big thing a religion or
something which has been growing for
thousands of years and there's no way of
examining it with a magnifying glass and
seeing that it's any different from one
that is heading towards the truth so we
might hope that most of the big ones are
heading towards the truth According to
some definition of most
in one Universe you can get a hint of
that already because you can say what
idea is most persuasive okay many bad
ideas are persuasive one idea is most
persuasive two people who adopt it
because they think it solves their
problem okay but there are many such
ideas that are false too so I'm afraid
it's not going to work if there were a
limit to the size of error you would
know that once you've made an error of a
certain size when you have your next
idea it's bound to be true no one can
make more than 256 errors in a row would
be the thing and nothing like that is
true no shortcuts exactly there's no
shortcut it seems that the nature of
knowledge is that it creates
non-linearities so even a single false
idea can create a false knowledge that
overwhelms the truth for quite a while
in a large amount of space yes so it's
always creative it's always conjectural
it's always contextual which gives an
Infinity of improvement ahead of us
which keeps life interesting